

Notes

Modeling for RDBMS
Step 1: Define Schema

Step 2: Develop application and queries

Data dictates how you develop your application, work around the data.
As data model evolves, performance drops.




Data Modeling with MongoDB
1. Develop the application
2. Define the Data Model
3. Improve the application
4. Improve the Data Model

Last 2 steps compliment each other, as one improves, the other should improve with it.
Allows the way you use your date to dictate how it is stored, provides many design options.
- Many design options
- Designed for the usage pattern
- Data model evolution is easy
- Can evolve wihtout any downtime


Data model is defined at the application level.
Design is part of each phase of the application lifetime
The data that your application needs and the applications read and write usage of the data affect the data model





Step by Step Iteration of the Data Model
- Evaluate the application workload(potential application workload, Business domain expertise, Current and predicted scenario, Production logs and Stats)
Data size
List of operations ranked by importance
- Map out entities and their relationships
gets CRD: Collection relationship Diagram

- Finalize the data model for each Collection
Identify and apply relevant design patterns

Final Product:
Collections with documents fields and shapes for each
Data size
Database queries and indexes
Current operations assumptions and growth projections





Link or Embed?
    Relationships:
    One-to-one
    One-to-Many
    Many-to-Many

    One to One
    Linking - Linking two separate things
    Embed - Embedding one thing into the opther to make them part of the same

    One to Many
    can link parent to child or child to parent
    ex: link all books in authors data, or link author in each books data

    Many to Many
    link on both sides, book has array and authors have array

    Questions to ask
    - How often does the embedded information get accessed?
    - Is the data queried using the embdded information
    - Does the mebedded information change often?


JSON = JavaScript Standard Object Notation
- Format starts and ends with curly braces{}
- Separates each key and value with a colon:
- Separates each key value pair with a comma,
- keys must be surrounded with quotation marks
- MongoDB calls "keys" as "fields"

Pros and Cons
Pros
- Friendly
- Readable
- Familiar
Cons
- Text-based
- Space-consuming
- Limited

BSON - Binary JSON, a binary representation of JSON
Optimized for speed, efficiency and Space

MongoDB stores data in BSON, but JSON can be natively stored
and retrieved with MongoDB as well.

Whether you export in BSON or JSON depends on your needs
for the data

JSON - mongoimport mongooutport
BSON - mongorestore mongodump

export
mongodump --uri "<Atlas Cluster URI>"  (BSON)



mongoexport --uri "<Atlas Cluster URI>"
            --collection=<collection name>
            --out=<filename>.json
import
mongorestore --uri "<Atlas CLuster  URI>" (Imports data in BSON dump)
             --drop dump

mongoimport --uri "<Atlas CLuster URI>" (Imports data in JSON)
            --drop=<filename>.json



URI string
Uniform Resource Identifier
srv - establishes a secure connection



Data Explorer

Namespace - The concatenation of the database name and collection name
Queries must use valid JSON

Find Command

show dbs - shows a list of databases that are in the cluster
use - switches the database
show collections - shows the collections in the database
db.collection.find({json}) - specify the database and collection,

it - iterates through a cursor
cursor - pointer to result set of query
pointer - direct address of mem location

For example, you run the find command, then you see the first twenty results from the query.
From there, you would use it to go to the next twenty and so on

.count - gives the number of documents that match the given query can use after .find({query})
.pretty - makes json easier to read


CHAPTER 3
Inserting New Documents
Atlas UI
insert document button on thew top right
can use either json notation or edit using default view.  
Every document has an _id value, and each document must have a different _id field.
hit tab or use mouse to move onto next line.
can change data type on the side
ObjectID() - Default value for the _id field unless otherwise specified

Inserting Documents: insert() and Errors
db.collection.insert({query}) - Insert COmmand
cannot replicate same object ids 
--drop removes the collection before adding it back, so that there will be no duplicate key errors

Steps for smth
- connect to cluster 
- switch databases
- get random document
findOne() - good to use when looking for some document that matches the query or to get an idea of the
shape of the documents in this collection.
- copy random document
- insert this rand doc to see if duplicate key error pops up
nInserted - amt of documents after the error that got written
WriteError - shows that writing the document to the collection did not succeed
WriteResult - shows the amt of inserted documents
_id gets added automatically upon insertion

Inseting Documents:Order
Can add multiple by adding the documents into an array for Ex =  ([{"test": 1}, {"test":2}, {"test":3}])
BulkWriteResult({}) - returns results of bulk write
if order = true, if there is an error with one of the documents in the array, the documents afterward will
not be written.
add {"ordered": false} after the bracket, but inside the parentheses.

Updating Documents:
subdocuments - address field is an object or document
can have array of objects
can edit documents with the pencil icon
keep all types the same

Updating Documnets: mongo shell
One - updateOne() if multiple documnets are found, only the one that is found first will be updated
Many - updateMany() will update all documents that match a given query



db.collection.updateMany({query you are looking for}, {"$inc": {"pop": 10}})
"$inc" is an MQL update operator, and increments the value of the specified field by the given amt.
You can also separate each filed u want to increment by commas.
$set updates value of given field with specified value.  It can also implicitely create fields.
$push adds elemenets to the array field, or adds an array field to the document with the specified value


Deleting Documents and Collections
Garbage can button in Data Explorer.  Can delete db, collection or document.
One
- deleteOne()
Many 
- deleteMany()
- drop() for collections

Query Operators - Comparison

MQL Operators
Update Operators
Ex - $inc, $set, #unset
Eanbles us to modiify data in the database

Query Operators
Provide additional ways to locate data within the database

$ has multiple uses 
Precedes MQL Operators
Precedes Aggregation pipeline stages 
